Plato, Apology — selected passages
Translation: Benjamin Jowett (1892), Public Domain
Source: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1656

— On the unexamined life and the limits of knowledge —

I am wiser than this man, for neither of us appears to know anything great
and good; but he fancies he knows something, although he knows nothing;
whereas I, as I do not know anything, so I do not fancy I do. In this
trifling particular, then, I appear to be wiser than he, because I do not
fancy I know what I do not know.

The unexamined life is not worth living for a human being.

— On virtue and wealth —

I do nothing but go about persuading you all, old and young alike, not to
take thought for your persons or your properties, but first and chiefly to
care about the greatest improvement of the soul. I tell you that virtue is
not given by money, but that from virtue comes money and every other good
of man, public as well as private.

— On obeying conscience over crowd —

Men of Athens, I honour and love you; but I shall obey God rather than you,
and while I have life and strength I shall never cease from the practice
and teaching of philosophy.

If you think that a man of any worth at all ought to spend his time in
weighing up the prospects of life and death, you are mistaken. He has only
one thing to consider in performing any action — that is, whether he is
acting rightly or wrongly, like a good man or a bad one.

— On not fearing death —

For the fear of death is indeed the pretence of wisdom, and not real wisdom,
being a pretence of knowing the unknown; and no one knows whether death,
which men in their fear apprehend to be the greatest evil, may not be the
greatest good.

To fear death, my friends, is only to think ourselves wise, without being
wise: for it is to think that we know what we do not know.

— On the role of the philosopher in the city —

I am that gadfly which God has attached to the state, and all day long and
in all places am always fastening upon you, arousing and persuading and
reproaching you. You will not easily find another like me.

— On poverty as proof of sincerity —

I have never been any one's teacher. If any one says that he has ever
learned or heard anything from me in private which all the world has not
heard, let him say that he is not speaking the truth. The poverty in which
I live is sufficient evidence that I have spoken the truth.

— On accepting the verdict —

Wherefore, O judges, be of good cheer about death, and know this of a
truth — that no evil can happen to a good man, either in life or after
death.

The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways — I to die, and you
to live. Which is better God only knows.
