Plato, Phaedo — selected passages
Translation: Benjamin Jowett (1892), Public Domain
Source: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1658

— On grief and its philosophical examination —

When the day broke, Apollodorus was loud and vehement, and the rest of us
followed his example. We could not contain ourselves; the tears flowed
freely. Socrates alone retained his calmness. "What is this strange
outcry?" he said. "I sent away the women mainly in order that they might
not misbehave in this way, for I have been told that a man should die in
peace. Be quiet, then, and have patience."

— On philosophy as preparation for death —

The true philosopher has been all his life occupied in nothing else but
dying and being dead. The body is a hindrance to the acquisition of
knowledge in the search for true being; and only with the eye of the mind
do we behold the truth.

— On the soul and intuition —

Have we not also a method of approach by reasoning, that the soul is more
like the unchanging than the body? And we say that when the soul makes use
of the body for any inquiry, the body draws her into the region of the
changeable, and she wanders and is confused; the world spins round her,
and she is like a drunkard.

— On wisdom not given but earned —

True philosophers, Simmias, are always occupied in the practice of dying.
And they, of all men, are least afraid of death.

— On dreams and signs —

In the course of my life I have often had intimations in dreams that I
should compose music. The same dream came to me sometimes in one form,
sometimes in another, but always saying the same or nearly the same words:
"Cultivate and make music," said the dream. And hitherto I had imagined
that this was only intended to exhort and encourage me in the study of
philosophy, which has been the pursuit of my life, and is the noblest and
best of music.

— On the limits of human inquiry —

A man should persevere until he has attained one of two things: either he
should discover, or be taught the truth about them; or, if this be
impossible, I would have him take the best and most irrefragable of human
theories, and let this be the raft upon which he sails through life — not
without risk, as I admit, if he cannot find some word of God which will
more surely and safely carry him.
